[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
PROFESSOR: OK, so remember
that projection theory
works differently over--
if you look in finite
fields, it works differently
over a prime field
or a not prime field.
And here was the key example.
So we're going to
do projection theory
and Fq and q is p squared.
And our set of points is
going to be Fp squared, which
is a subset of Fq squared.
And our set of
directions is going
to be Fp, which
is a subset of Fq.
So remember that
if theta is in Fq,
then pi theta is going to be
a projection, a linear map,
from Fq squared to Fq, which
is given by pi theta of x1,
x2 is x1 plus theta x2.
So this is our
set of directions.
And then S, which
is the maximum size
of the projection of x
over all these directions
is p because pi theta of x
is just Fp for theta and D.
So if you just write down the
sizes of all the things in this
important example,
x is p squared,
which is q and S and D are
p which is q to the 1/2.
So in particular, notice that
the size of each projection
is the square root of
the size of the set.
So nothing like this is
supposed to happen over Fp.
There's a hard open
conjecture that
gives bounds that are much
stronger than this example.
But the techniques
that we've talked
about for most of the class
do not depend on the field.
So the double counting does
not distinguish prime fields
from nonprime fields.
And the Fourier method does
not distinguish prime fields
from nonprime fields.
The Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
proves that this numerology
cannot happen for a
set of points in R2,
but the proof is very important,
but it has some limitations
in how it could apply.
It certainly won't
apply over Fp.
And it also doesn't seem to help
very much from the point of view
of sets of balls in R2 with
some kind of spacing condition.
So it depends what
spacing condition,
but for the most interesting
it doesn't help very much.
Nevertheless, we know that
this cannot happen over finite
fields.
And the main theorem that
we'll-- so this week,
we'll prove a theorem that
says that this cannot happen.
So this is the theorem of
Bourgain, Katz, and Tau.
So again, Katz-Tau
projection theorem--
it says the following.
So if we have x in Fp squared,
and let's say that the size of x
is p to the S, where S is
somewhere between 0 and 2.
And then we have a set
of directions in Fp,
and set of directions
will be p to the t.
And t is bigger than 0.
So then, if you look at the
maximum size of a projection,
it's significantly bigger
than half over the square root
of the size of x.
So this is bigger than p to
the S over 22 plus epsilon
where this epsilon only
depends on S and t.
It's bigger than 0.
So some remarks
about the epsilon--
it's an explicit function.
I just don't write it down
because it's a little bit messy.
For example, it's continuous.
It's not that hard
to write it down,
but it is also pretty small,
pretty disappointingly small.
There's also something called
Bourgain's projection theorem,
which is what Pablo Shmerkin is
going to talk about today, which
is the analog of this over in
the setting of the reel of balls
in R2.
So there's an analog of this
example using C2 instead of R2.
And then Bourgain's
projection theorem
is the analog of this theorem
that rules out that example.
This is an analogous
theorem for balls in R2.
And these two theorems, in spite
of the fact that this epsilon is
very small, are very
important landmark results
in the field of
projection theory,
and they play a key role
in many applications.
This Bourgain projection
theorem, it plays a key role
in getting the sharp projection
estimates in R2, the recent work
that Pablo Shmerkin and
others were involved in.
This Bourgain
projection theorem also
plays an important role in
the solution of the k problem.
And this finite field projection
theorem, as well as this one,
have an important role in
some interesting applications
about how fast
different processes mix.
If you take some generators of
a finite group like SL2 or Fp
and then they make
a random walk,
how fast does this random
walk become evenly distributed
in SL2 Fp?
This is an important
ingredient in studying that.
So in spite of the fact
that the epsilon is small,
these theorems are
very important,
and they're also
qualitatively different
from the other theorems because
they're sensitive to what kind
of field we're working in.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What is the
analog of p for balls in R2?
PROFESSOR: The
analog of p-- so we
would have the
setting would be you'd
have unit balls and
a ball of radius R.
And R is the analog of p.
So all the sizes of things,
we could think of them
as powers of R. Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Do the proofs
use similar arguments
or are they
completely different?
PROFESSOR: The question
is, do these two proofs
use similar arguments or are
they completely different?
There are multiple proofs of
this, but at least one of them
is very similar to this with
one layer of additional ideas.
So my plan is that
we'll do this,
and then we'll talk about the
additional ideas to do this.
OK, cool.
Well, so the key difference
between Fq and Fp
is that Fq has a subfield
and Fp has no subfield.
Now it's elementary to check
that Fp has no subfield.
But because we're proving some
kind of quantitative estimates,
we need some
quantitative lemma that
says that Fp not
only has no subfield,
but it doesn't have anything
that's kind of approximately
a subfield.
So the main goal for today will
be to develop lemmas like that.
And let me show you-- so here's
the first version of lemma
like that, lemma 1.
Actually, let me do--
I think we need a
little notation.
So suppose that A
is a subset of Fp.
If I write A plus A,
then that means the set
of all the sums a1 plus
a2 where a1 and a2 are
in A. We could write A times A.
That's the set of all the
products a1 times a2, a1,
and a2 in A, and so on.
So you can write a lot of
similar things like this,
and I think it'll be
clear what they all mean.
But if it's not, of course,
we'll talk about it.
So here's the lemma.
It's a quantitative lemma that
says that no subset behaves
too much like a subfield.
So it says if A
is a subset of Fp,
then either one option is
that A minus A over A minus A
is all of Fp.
And the second option is that
if you multiply and add stuff
in and subtract stuff, a lot
of times, it will get bigger.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6--
6 might be enough.
I think it might be 8.
So one possibility is if you
multiply, add, and subtract
elements of A a
lot of times, then
you get a lot more
stuff than just A.
So this says A is not
too close to a subfield.
And the other options is if
you do this, you get all of Fp.
Now, of course, A could have
been almost all of Fp already.
So then it is kind
of almost a field.
But if A was originally
a lot smaller than Fp,
then, in this case, this thing
is a lot bigger than A. Cool.
So here is the proof--
observation one.
So if c is not in A
minus A over A minus A,
then A plus cA has
size a squared.
Let me make sure it's clear
what all the notation means.
So if I write this thing, I have
four copies of A. So take a1,
a2, a3, a4, any four guys in A,
and plug them in for the capital
A's.
All the things you can get,
that's what this set is.
And similarly, over
here, the lowercase c
is a particular element of Fp.
And this means take any
a1 and a2 and do this.
So the proof of observation
one is quite simple.
So suppose that I have two
different elements in here
but that are equal
to each other.
So suppose a1 plus a2 is the
same as a1 prime plus a2 prime.
Well, if I do a little algebra,
I can solve this for c.
And I discovered that c is a1
prime minus a1 divided by a2
minus a2 prime, which is an
A minus A. So if c is not
an A minus A-- sorry, which is
an A minus A over A minus A--
so if c is not in
here, then all of
these different representations
are actually different numbers.
So the size of this
set is A squared.
Now if you want to
be really careful,
maybe we should worry about
whether I have divided by 0.
But if a2 is equal to a2
prime, then the only way
that the top equation
could be true
is if also a1 is
equal to a1 prime.
And then I just
have the same thing.
All right, great.
So if I can locate some c that
is in the ring of stuff I can
make by adding and multiplying--
maybe if I can add and subtract
and multiply and divide a bunch
of elements of A and I can
locate some c which
is not in here,
then I can use this observation,
and I can get some--
I can show that I can build
out of A many different things.
OK, cool.
Now somewhere in
our proof, we have
to use that Fp is a prime field.
It wouldn't work in Fq and
we haven't used it yet.
Well, how are we
going to use it.
Well, let's just remember
how we would prove
that Fp is a prime field--
sorry, how would we prove
that Fp has no subfields?
How are we going to prove that?
Well, if it had a subfield
it would have to contain 1,
and then it would
have to contain--
then it would be
closed under addition,
so it would have to contain
2 and 3 and 4 and so on.
And then it would have
to contain all of Fp.
So we're basically going to use
that argument in observation
two.
So observation two, if A minus
A over A minus A is not Fp,
then there exists some B
in A minus A over A minus A
so that B plus 1 is
not in A minus A over A
minus A. Why is it?
So 0 is an A minus A
over A minus A. It's
a proof of observation two.
0 is in there because you can
choose these to be the same.
And you can choose
those to be different.
If one is not--
so then we just--
either everybody in Fp
is in A minus A minus A
minus A or somebody is not.
And so then we take B
plus 1 is the smallest
number which is not an A minus A
over A minus A. And there we go.
And the special thing
that we're using about Fp,
we've used that we have
the prime field, which
is just we're using that.
If you start at 0 and
you keep adding 1,
you get all of the elements.
So that's the proof
of observation two.
And so now we are
basically done.
So now we have seen that
if A minus A over A minus A
is not Fp, then if you take
A and you add this B plus 1.
So B is an A minus
A over A minus A.
And I'm going to add 1 to it.
So B plus 1 is in here.
There is bigger than A squared.
So if I take six elements
of A and I do this,
the number of different
guys I will get
is really much bigger then.
And then this doesn't
look exactly like my two,
but I just clear the denominator
and expand things out.
So when I clear the
denominator, I'll
get A times A minus A
times A from this guy,
inside of here, I'll
have A minus A plus A
minus A. I'll multiplied by
A. I have a bunch of stuff.
So I know-- So that's Katz
and I are old collaborators.
And I remember talking
with him about this,
and that it took quite a while
for them to figure out how
to get started on this problem.
Now, looking back at this,
this proof is really clean.
This lemma is perhaps not--
the statement of the lemma
is perhaps not the nicest
thing that you might like.
So there are kind
of cleaner things
like, for example,
later today, we'll
show that just this
is significantly
bigger than A and
different variations.
So maybe we should
mention-- we could ask
some much simpler questions.
We could just say if you
have a subset of Fp called A,
is it true that A plus A is
always much bigger than A?
That's true for most
subsets, but it's not
true for all of them.
But thinking about that much
simpler question is actually--
so that's foundational question
in additive combinatorics,
to understand that,
and understanding
that well feeds into being able
to understand this stuff better.
So let me pose this
on the board and we'll
start to talk about it.
So my question for us is
when is A plus A small?
So here I have in mind
that A is a subset of Fp,
although we could have a very
similar conversation if was
a subset of E or was A
subset of R or dot, dot, dot.
Can anybody think
of a subset of Fp
where A plus A is only a
tiny bit bigger than A. Yeah?
AUDIENCE: A is some
set of [INAUDIBLE] that
includes numbers and the
negative values of those numbers
in Fp, like only one
negative 1, two negative 2,
or something like that?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So the comment is maybe I
should have some numbers
and negative in those numbers.
Let me ask you a more
precise question.
So you have to choose
L numbers in Fp,
and you want to
choose them to make
A plus A as small as possible.
Who would you choose?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Could be an
arithmetic [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you
could choose an arithmetic
progression.
So example one-- suppose A was
just the numbers from 1 up to L.
So A plus A will be the
numbers from negative 2 to 2L.
So A plus A is at
most 2 times A.
It's the tiniest
bit less than that,
but not very important
for our discussion.
And this is the smallest that
A plus A could possibly be.
And it doesn't have
to be one up to L.
It would work just as well if it
was an arithmetic progression.
So example one prime--
our set A is little a plus nd,
where n goes from 1 up to L.
And then if you think
about it a little bit,
the size of the subset
behaves just the same.
There's another example
that's a little bit more
general than this.
So this is an
arithmetic progression
where you have just
one kind of difference.
And you could have something--
so you could visualize
it like this.
And you could have
a similar thing
involving a two-dimensional grid
or a higher-dimensional grid.
So example two is
that A is a plus n1
d1 plus dot, dot, dot plus nr dr
where ni goes from 1 up to Li.
So what happens when
you take A plus A?
It is contained in 2a
plus n1 d1 plus dot, dot,
dot plus nr dr where, now,
the ni go in between 2 and 2L.
And so we see from this--
well, which is contained in--
I could put a 1.
So it's contained in something
that is 2 to the r times bigger.
So we get A plus A is bounded
by 2 to the r times A.
So this thing here is called
a generalized arithmetic
progression.
It has a dimension,
little r, and it
has a volume or cardinality,
which is L1 up to Lr.
Can anybody think of any others?
So it is hard to
think of other ones.
And in some sense,
and depending on how
we quantify it a little bit,
these sets or maybe these sets
and their close cousins appear
to be the only sets that
have a really small subset.
And this was investigated
by Freiman starting
in the '60s and '70s, and he
proved a theorem to that effect
called Freiman's theorem.
And this is a cornerstone
of additive combinatorics.
Freiman's proof was
somewhat difficult to read,
and Ruzsa thought a lot
about it and clarified it.
And so this is
now called usually
the Freiman-Ruzsa theorem.
So it says the following thing--
says that if A is in Z--
the same thing would
be true in Z mod p--
and A plus A is less
than or equal to KA,
then A is contained in a gap
with dimension little r that
only depends on K
and volume at most
V. That only depends on
K times the size of A.
So it roughly says that
if A plus A is small,
it is because a
resembles example
two, which is a
generalization of example one.
So in some sense these
are the only sets that
have a really small subset.
So this is an important theorem
in additive combinatorics.
But there are two
caveats about it.
So one caveat is that it's
a pretty deep theorem,
where the proof is substantial.
And the other caveat is that the
quantitative bounds are weak.
So in the original version,
r of K was quite large.
So r of K was something like
x of K to a power and V of K
was even larger, so xp
of x of K to a power.
Now it is a trivial fact
that any set A is contained
in a generalized arithmetic
progression of dimension
equal to the size of A. So this
is only interesting if r of K
is smaller than the size of A.
So this was only interesting,
only meaningful, let's
say, if k was quite small.
There is a big goal in
additive combinatorics
to improve the
quantitative bounds
in Friedman's theorem, and.
one benchmark is a conjecture
called the polynomial frame
in Ruzsa conjecture, which would
say something meaningful even
if K was a small power of A.
So there's a
conjecture that they
would have a
meaningful bound if K
is A to the delta for some
small but universal delta
bigger than 0.
And this is still
an open conjecture.
So it's out of range,
maybe only a little
out of range of
current techniques.
But if K was, say, I
don't know, A to the 0.1,
all this stuff about
Freiman's theorem,
we are very far from being
able to deal with that.
Now, if you look at Freiman's
theorem, what we're trying to do
is to give a complete
classification of all the sets a
that do this.
And the complete
classification is
something we only understand
if K is really, really small.
But you could also
ask for something
which is not as strong as
a complete classification,
but just some kind of
interesting information
about sets with small subset.
So if you look at
this example, you'll
notice that not only
it has small subset,
but it has also small
a bunch of other stuff.
In these examples,
A plus A is small.
Also, A minus A is small.
Also, A plus A plus A is small.
And for those things, we
have much simpler proofs,
and the quantitative
bounds are much better.
And they come from some
lemmas that I think originally
were designed as
lemmas for this theorem
but which have lots of
independent applications.
So this theorem, I don't
plan to prove in the class,
but I wanted to mention
it for historical context.
And these lemmas
are really important
and have reasonable short
proofs and, I think,
are worth for a wide range
of people knowing about them.
So the first of the lemmas
is called the Ruzsa triangle
inequality.
So it says if Z is an abelian
group, and A and B and C
are subsets of Z, then size of
A times the size of B minus C
is bounded by the size of A
minus B times the size of A
minus C.
So this might take
a little digesting.
All of these letters feels a
little bit like alphabet soup.
The fact that we can
put three different sets
makes it a little
harder to digest.
But, of course, it makes it
more flexible in general.
And by plugging in different
choices for these three sets,
you can prove some
simpler things.
Let me illustrate
this with an example.
As a corollary of
this, we will see
that if the sum set is small,
then the difference set is also
small.
So corollary-- if A plus A
is smaller than K times A,
then A minus A is smaller than
K squared K squared times L.
So this lemma is
meaningful as long
as K is slightly smaller
than the square root of A.
So in a much wider range than
the Freiman-Ruzsa theorem.
This is a meaningful statement.
So proof-- we're just
going to use Ruzsa,
and I have to tell you
who are A and B and C.
So A will be A. And
then I think B--
let me see.
Yeah, B and C are both negative
A. So if you look at B minus C,
there's a lot of minus signs.
This is a little
bit silly looking.
So that's just A minus A.
And A minus B or A minus C--
they're the same as
each other because B
is the same as C. That's A minus
negative A. So that's A plus A.
So now if we just
plug in Ruzsa, it
says A times this
guy, A minus A,
is less than this
guy times this guy.
That's A plus A squared.
And by hypothesis,
that's smaller
than K squared A squared.
And if you cancel the
factor of A, that's it.
And this has a very simple proof
that will fit on this board
and which already says something
interesting and nontrivial
about how sums and differences
and stuff fit together.
So here's the proof.
We will construct a map phi
that goes from A cross B minus C
into A minus B cross A
minus C, which is injective.
So this is the
cardinality of this set.
And this is the
cardinality of that set.
And the reason that this
set is bigger than that set
is that we have an injection
from one end to the other.
How does the injection work?
For every d in B minus
C, we can choose--
so by definition,
this d can be written
as somebody in B minus
somebody in C. Let's pick them.
We choose B of d
and B C of d and C
so that d is B of d minus C of d
Now, what's our map?
Phi takes an A and a d.
A lives here, and d lives there.
We need to output
somebody an A minus
so we take A minus B of d
and then A minus C of d.
So that is a map
from here to here.
Why is it injective?
So to check that
it's injective, we're
going to suppose that phi
of A d is given to us as xy.
And then we're going to
find A and d from x and y
and from this choice.
So the choice we made,
once and for all, we
used it to build the map.
And now we have to prove that
there's only one A and d that
give a certain x and y here.
So how do we recover them?
Well, if this is
x and this is y,
let me see that y minus x is B
of d minus C of d, which is d.
So that's how we find d.
And once we find d,
it's easy to find--
once we find d, then we
know B of d and C of d,
and now it's easy to find
A. So x minus x plus B of d
is A. It's very short.
It feels a teeny bit
like a magic trick to me.
But on this board
and this board,
we have seen that if
the sum set is small,
then the difference
set is also small.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Take the log, you get
something that looks exactly
like a triangle inequality
is there any way
to see that it's [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so the
question is it's called triangle
inequality.
And it looks like if we take the
logarithm and play with this,
then something will look
like the triangle inequality.
So Ruzsa did have that in mind
when he named it that way.
So he produced a pseudodistance
between different sets,
say, between A and B
or B and C or whatever.
And this translates into saying
that the Ruzsa pseudodistance
obeys the triangle inequality.
The distance from B to C is
bounded by the distance from A
to B plus the different distance
from B to A plus the distance
from A to C.
I'm not sure whether
that is helpful or not.
Pseudodistance is
a little bit funny.
It's not true that the
distance from A to itself is 0.
So it's not quite like
distances that I'm used to.
So that intuition, may
or may not be helpful.
I guess we will see tomorrow
that, sometimes, you
use this many times.
How would you use the
triangle inequality?
Well, the distance
from A to Z is
bounded by the distance from
A to B plus the distance
from B to C plus the
distance from C to D,
duh, duh, duh, duh, duh, and
maybe each of those things
is easier to understand.
And by the triangle inequality,
we can put them together.
So you can use this
inequality in that way.
And we'll see that tomorrow--
Thursday.
Any other questions or comments?
AUDIENCE: Can I ask about
the movie denominator trick?
Just not sure how
that worked out.
Does it require something
nontrivial like this?
PROFESSOR: The question is about
the removing the denominator
trick?
AUDIENCE: Can you
use that [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Like when we had an
A minus A in the denominator
and we multiplied it out?
So that was just algebra.
It's not something
fancy like this.
Let me bracket that.
We'll see a little
later, something else
with removing denominators.
And let's come back to it then.
Do you think-- did I
understand your question or--
AUDIENCE: Yeah, I'm just not
sure how that [INAUDIBLE]
AUDIENCE: You only
need 6 instead of 8
because that's the--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, let's check in
about it at the end of class.
The other important
lemma from this field
that went into the proof
of Freiman's theorem
is called Plunnecke inequality.
Plunnecke inequality
allows us to say things
like if A plus A is small,
then A plus A plus A is small.
So if A and B are subsets
of Z, an abelian group,
and A plus B is bounded
by K times A, then--
let me make a little notation.
So sometimes, we might want to
talk about B plus B many times.
So let's say this is n times.
This is sometimes
written as n times B,
although I feel like that
is slightly confusing.
So I've decided to adopt this
notation, B some n times.
So I could take B plus m
times minus B plus n times,
and that's bounded by K
to the m plus n times A.
So let's do a few
corollaries of this.
So just by plugging
in A equals B,
we see that if A plus A is
less than or equal to KA,
then A minus A is
less than K squared A.
That's actually the
corollary we already proved.
But also, we could
say A plus A plus A
is bounded by K cubed A. I'm
just plugging in A equals B,
and this is m is 3 and n is 0.
And you can see you can
put higher powers here.
Also another
corollary we can get
is we can switch the
role of these guys
in the first corollary.
So we can say if A
minus A is small,
then A plus A is also small.
So proof is that B is negative
A. So this is A plus B.
And then this is
basically B plus B.
We can also use this.
So we'll prove this.
That will be our last
big goal of the class.
So this Ruzsa inequality
and Plunnecke inequality
have many, many uses.
And one simple use is we can
use it to clean up and improve
the statement of
our lemma that Fp
has no quantitative
approximate subfields.
So let me recall what
we proved so far,
and then we'll improve
it a little bit.
So lemma one was
if A is in Fp, then
either A minus A over
A minus A is all of Fp
or A times A minus A times A--
so now I can write this better.
We have three or four of
those minus three or four
of those A squared.
So we can improve
this in a way that you
don't need to have so many
different expressions floating
around.
So we can say that if A
is in Fp and the size of A
is p to the S, where S
is strictly less than 1,
then the size of A
times A minus A times A
is at least p to the S plus
epsilon of S. And here,
you could put either
plus or minus.
And this epsilon of
S is bigger than 0.
So again, it's continuous.
It's explicit.
But it's a little bit messy,
and it's a little bit small.
You take any subset which
is significantly smaller
than the whole field, if you
take A times A minus A times A,
it will be significantly
bigger than you started with.
So if you just took
A minus A, that
wouldn't be good enough because
A could be an arithmetic
progression.
So that might have almost
the same size as A.
If you just took A
times A, that wouldn't
be good enough, because A could
be a geometric progression--
2 to the 1, 2 to the
2, up to 2 to the L.
But if you take both
sums and products,
then you have to end up with
significantly more stuff
than you started with.
So that's why this is
called sum-product theory.
If you have both sums
and products interacting
with each other, then
something happens.
So proof-- so there are two
cases, case 1 and case 2.
But I'm actually going
to do case 2 first.
So it could be that A times A
is already much bigger than A.
Then we just declare victory.
So if A times A is bigger than
A to the plus delta and we
declare victory.
And here, delta is going to
be much smaller than epsilon.
Or maybe we could say that.
Otherwise, A times A is
basically the same size as A.
Now, if A times A plus A
times A is much bigger than A,
then we declare victory.
Wait a second.
Yeah, here.
I guess let's just
put this right here.
Then we declare victory.
Otherwise, we would
have A times A plus A
times A is smaller
than K A times A
where K is like
p to the epsilon.
And then we can use Plunnecke.
And that would tell
us that A times
to A big power minus A
times to another big power.
Here, we could put 4.
That would be bounded by
K to the eighth A times A.
And so that would be
bounded by maybe A times p
to the 10 epsilon or
something like that.
And this contradicts
the fact that this we
know this set is big.
And case 1 is similar,
but I think maybe I'll
make that an exercise.
You can just practice using
Plunnecke and Ruzsa things.
And I do one more corollary.
So suppose you
start with the set A
and you start multiplying
and adding and subtracting
and see what you get.
And we've proven that after
you do this operation,
it gets a bit bigger.
But suppose you don't just--
yeah?
AUDIENCE: Question.
So you said that the idea is
that if you have some arithmetic
progression or geometric
progression, it can be small,
but it has to be learned.
Is it possible to
prove that instead
of the difference of A
times A and A times A,
you can just say A times A is
large or A plus A is large?
PROFESSOR: OK, yes,
great question.
So the question is, so
in the theme of lemma 2
is we tried to simplify as
much as possible the expression
that we put here.
And there is a suggestion how to
make it as simple as possible.
So then I'm going to erase this
proof and write that as a--
I'll write it as a theorem.
So even better, there is a
theorem Bourgain-Katz-Tao
So if A is subset
of Fp, A equals p
to the S 0 less than or
equal to S less than 1,
then you could take the maximum
of A plus A and A times A,
and that is bigger than p
to the S plus epsilon of S.
So this is better than
this, qualitatively.
And actually, the word
sum product inequality--
it could refer to
a lot of things,
but the inequality it most
often refers to is this one,
so either the sums
or the products grow.
Yeah, that's right.
So all the stuff
we've seen are steps
towards the proof
of this theorem,
but there is actually still
some more ideas to get
all the way down to here.
And we may or may not end
up doing it in the class.
It's unclear to me if getting
all the way down to there
is actually important
in projection theory.
Yeah, cool.
So one goal you might have
in simplifying and clarifying
this story is to make this
expression as simple as possible
and get some gain.
But another goal
that you might have
is to make this
gain really large,
and perhaps this expression
will be more complicated.
And you can also do that.
So let me make some notation.
Let's say poly K of some
polynomials of complexity K,
so I take A to the
K. So that means
I multiply K different
elements of A together.
And then I add K things
like that together.
And then maybe I also
want some minuses.
So A to the K is A
times A times A K times.
So these are polynomials
in of complexity.
And another corollary,
which is at the same level,
follows easily from
this one is that if we
have 0 less than S less than
t less than 1 and A is in Fp,
then there exists some K
that only depends on S and t
so that for any set A in
any Fp, where the size of A
is p to the S, the size of poly
K of A is at least p to the t.
And the proof of this is easy.
The proof is use
lemma 2 many times.
So I start with the set
A. A times A minus A times
is a bit bigger.
Call this B. B times B minus B
times B is even a bit bigger.
And if you think about what B
times B minus B times B means,
it would fit in poly for an
A, and you keep doing this.
OK, cool.
So these lemmas,
theorems, and stuff,
they are important
because-- inequality
and Ruzsa's inequality,
they are important because--
so if we see something
like A plus A is small,
then that tells us that
A has some structure.
And all these
inequalities, then,
imply that lots of
other things are small.
So it's like a
contagious structure.
We input some structure,
but we find out
more and more structure.
And that's a very useful tool.
And so lots of problems that
we see in projection theory,
it seems to be helpful to try
to phrase them in the form
that some subset is
small because, then, we
can use as inequality and we can
find out lots of other things.
So in the last
part of the class,
we will prove this inequality.
This is the trickiest thing
that we will prove today.
So the original proof
of the inequality
was somewhat
difficult. And there
was a short proof that was given
by Georgios Petrides about 10
or 15 years ago, which is
the one that I'll show.
So it's based on a key lemma.
So the lemma says that if A plus
B is at most K times A, then
there's a subset x contained
in A so that for any set
C, x plus C plus B divided by
x plus C is also at most K.
By the way, this top
inequality-- of course,
we can divide by A. The top
inequality says A plus B over A
is bounded by K. The lemma
says that if this is true,
if it's true for
the set A, then it's
also true for the set x plus
C, where x is carefully chosen.
I'll explain in a
bit how it's chosen,
but C is a totally
arbitrary set.
So there are many
choices for C. So there
are many different-- this
is many inequalities.
Let me tell you
who x is, which is
an important idea in the proof.
So first of all, so
x is a subset of A
that we choose in order
to minimize the ratio x
plus B over x.
So let me give an
example that might
help to motivate why you
would want to look at this x.
So suppose that A is the
numbers from 1 up to 100,
which has a lot of
additive structure
together with some
random number.
So I put a million.
And B is the numbers
from 1 up to, say, 50.
So if you add A and B together,
this stuff plus this stuff
is quite small.
There's a lot of
structure there.
Then there's this
stuff plus this stuff.
That doesn't have any
particular structure.
But since there's only
one stray element here,
that's not so many
of those either.
So A plus B is pretty small.
Now, who would x be?
x was the subset of A which is
chosen to minimize this ratio.
And including this
guy is not so helpful.
So x would actually
be here, just
the numbers from 1 up to 100.
So I think perhaps
that, philosophically,
the point of doing this is
identifying the part of A that
really has the
additive structure
and throwing away, possibly,
some parts of A that
are not that relevant.
And then, once you have found
the heart of the matter here,
then you can add
anything else to it.
And you still have that
amount of structure.
So let's give a name.
Let's say that--
so that's who x is.
And let's say x plus B over x is
K lower bar, which is at most K.
So A plus B over A is at most K.
And x is allowed to be all of A.
But we might choose a
smaller set if we can
make this ratio even smaller.
So K bar is less
than or equal to K.
And really, the key claim is
that x plus C plus B over x
plus C is at most K
lower bar for any x.
So now we're going to prove
the claim by induction.
So we're going to prove
the claim by induction
on the cardinality of C. And
the cardinality of C is 1.
Then x plus C plus B is just x
plus B. And x plus C is just x.
So if the cardinality of C is
1, I'm just shifting this set.
And shifting that set doesn't
change their cardinality.
So now we can do
the inductive step.
So let's say that C
prime is C union--
one more guy.
And by induction, we know
that it's true for C.
So we know x plus C plus B is
bounded by K lower bar x plus C.
And we want to
check for C prime.
So the key character in this
argument that Petrides came up
with is a set y, which
is the set of x and X
so that x plus little
C plus B is contained
in big X plus big C plus B.
Let's see how that naturally
comes up.
So we're thinking about x
plus C prime plus B. We want
to see that it's not too big.
And we're using induction.
So we want to see how it changes
when we added this one guy.
So this is the previous guy, x
plus C plus B plus the new ones,
and I want them
to be really new.
So here are some new
elements that live here,
and I'm going to take out any
elements I've already counted.
AUDIENCE: Sorry, I don't quite
understand the definition
of how can x plus C plus B not
be a subset of x plus C plus B.
PROFESSOR: So C prime
is a previous set C
union with some little c.
And little c is
not in big C. Now
I have to write all the little
c's and big Cs really carefully.
But this is a little c,
and this is a big C. Cool.
So this x is
automatically in big X,
but in a failure of
functoriality of notation,
little c is not in big C.
Now, one thing to note
about this definition that
helps to motivate it is that
y plus little C plus big B
is contained in x
plus big C plus big B
because for each element
of y, little y plus little
c plus big B is
defined to be in here.
So this is at most x plus c
plus B plus x plus c plus B
take away y plus c plus B.
All of these were
already counted.
So there are at most
this many new guys.
And this is x plus C plus B
plus x plus B minus y plus B
because this is
a subset of this.
And the plus c just
translates things.
So this thing is that big and
I remove from it this thing,
which is that big.
So that's the upper
bound for the numerator.
So I'm trying to bound
this thing with a C prime.
I want to prove an upper
bound, so an upper bound
for the numerator and a lower
bound for the denominator.
So the denominator
is x plus C prime.
And so that's x plus C plus
the set how many x and x.
So that little x
plus little c is not
contained in big X
plus big C. So the guys
I already had, and then
I have guys of the form
little x plus little c.
And I only want the new ones.
The ones that aren't
already counted.
So that's an equality.
And I'm going to write it as x
plus c plus x minus the x and x
so that x plus c is in x plus c.
And now the key observation is
that these guys are all in y.
This is a subset of y because
if little x plus little c
is In big X plus big C--
so if little x plus little
c is in big X plus big C,
then I can add B to both sides.
And this is in there.
So those are all in y.
So this is a subset of y.
So the size of this guy
is at most the size of y.
And since I'm
subtracting here, I
can say this is at least
x plus c plus x minus y.
So now we'll just put together
everything that we know.
We know that x plus C plus B
over x plus C is at most K bar.
We know that by induction.
We know that x plus B
over x is equal to K bar.
We know that by definition.
That's just what K bar was.
And we know that
y plus B over y is
greater than or equal to K bar.
That was the definition of x.
x was chosen to
minimize this ratio.
y might perhaps be equal to x.
But that's OK.
But it's never going
to be any smaller.
And so therefore, by algebra,
by how fractions work,
x plus C plus B--
oh, sorry.
So now I can say--
I want to say x plus C prime
plus B over x plus C prime,
and I want an upper
bound for that.
So the numerator
is bounded by 1 x
plus C plus B plus x
plus B minus y plus B.
And the denominator is
lower bounded by part two.
And it's x plus
C plus x minus y.
And then because each of these
ratios has the correct sign,
this is at most K lower bar.
So this is short.
It is a little tricky.
And I must admit, I don't
quite understand how
Petrides thought to do this.
So from the key lemma, we can
prove Plunnecke inequality
and then see if anybody--
if you have room, you can
turn over in your mind,
philosophically, why did
this work out so nicely?
If anybody has thoughts about
it, I would be happy to hear.
So proof-- so say we're
starting with this.
So we use our main
lemma, so it tells us
that there exists
some x in A, and we
have x plus C plus B is at most
K times x plus C for any C.
How might we use this?
So C could be empty.
So we get x plus B
is at most K times x.
C could be B, so we get x plus
B plus B. That's at most K times
x plus B. And x plus B
is at most K times x.
So that's at most
K squared times x.
And you can see where this goes.
So I'll do one more.
You'll get the pattern.
If I add one more
B, That's at most
K X plus B plus B. Plug in what
I already know about this--
that's at most k cubed times x.
So if I add x plus
m copies of B,
that will be at most
k to the m times x.
And then we'll use
the Ruzsa inequality.
So this is already
pretty good thing.
If A equals B here, then
I could say A to the m
is bounded by K to the m
times A because A to the m
is obviously at least as
big as x plus A to the m.
So I get A to the m is
bounded by K to the m times
A. That's a typical
corollary of Plunnecke.
Anyway, to get the
advertised finale,
we use Ruzsa's inequality.
Ruzsa was A times--
so I can plug in--
so x times B plus
m minus B plus n
is bounded by x plus B
plus m x plus B plus n.
And then we plug
in each of these,
and we get a K to the m
plus n times x squared.
Yeah, that's right.
So then I get this by itself.
So B plus m minus B
plus n is bounded by K
to the m plus n
times x, which is
bounded by K to the
m plus n times A
because x is a subset of A.
So this proof is short.
It is a little tricky.
But I think it is
well worth spending
some time with because
this inequality is really
quite important.
I would say that it
plays really a key role
in all the later developments
in projection theory
and the solution to the
problem in a lot of things.
And so as we keep going
tomorrow or Thursday and so on,
we'll reflect more about why
this is useful and important.
And maybe I'll try to
come up with some homework
to try to reflect on how
this proof got put together.
Cool.